The Joe Rogan experience.
What made you want to write about testosterone?
What was the motivation behind those?
So I'll give you the short story first,
and then later I can give you the longer story.
The longer story involves chimpanzees. So that's.
Kind of fun, favorite.
Subjects. Um,
but the short story is that T I teach at Harvard about
hormones. I teach a course, um, behavioral,
well it's on behavioral endocrinology, it's called hormones and behavior.
And I've taught that for a long time now. And I got,
I got my PhD at Harvard, studying testosterone and behavior,
studying sex differences in the way we think and process information.
And I love I've just love the topic.
I love how much understanding testosterone helps me understand the world,
understand men. I'm not a man. I don't really understand men, uh,
or how they work, but understanding this hormone really has helped me a lot.
And then in teaching about endocrinology and specifically testosterone,
I get so much feedback from students about how it changes their lives,
changes, how they understand themselves personally,
how they understand their relationships, how they understand the world,
and it's empowering for them. And it's been empowering for me.
And so I just always had this
natural intellectual enthusiasm for this topic.
And, um, but I'd say in the last five years,
I felt like the science was coming under attack and there's been
kind of a program to dismantle the science of
testosterone and how it shapes behavior,
particularly the evolutionary basis of behavior, um,
has kind of come under attack. The idea that there,
that sex differences are grounded in biology.
And I know that testosterone is a really important part of that. And, uh,
there's a movement to kind of discredit that science or downplay the
importance of biology and specifically testosterone in our lives and especially
in sex differences.
And I'm fascinated by sex differences and I'm fascinated by how evolution shaped
sex differences across different species and how it works. And, uh,
so that's ultimately why I wrote the book,
cause I kind of want to get all the science out there and kind of push back
against what I see as an attack on really good science.
There's nothing wrong with understanding who we are from a biological point of
view. Uh,
and I think we should all be open to that and learn as much as we can about who
we are and how we were.
Yeah, I agree with you on it.
But I also think it's fascinating why I watch the attack on the science of
biology, the science of how if, like,
I think that if we were an objective observer,
like something other than human and we're watching human beings,
we would be really interested in the,
the sex differences between the male and the females. And what's why are there,
there's like this real clear pattern of behavior on both sides?
Obviously there's a spectrum in that pattern,
but depending upon the levels of hormones and the genetic variance,
there's a lot of like consistency and what is causing this and what is,
you know,
what is it about male behavior that leads to this and female behavior that lives
to lead to that.
But then you get into this weird thing where ideology
has somehow or another overtaken science with a lot of human
beings today.
So they're willing to abandon science if it's inconvenient for
their ideology.
And it's very strange because you see really intelligent people doing this,
which is where it's really spooky because they're scared of being chastised and
attacked on Twitter. They're scared of being canceled.
So they're scared of going against the mainstream,
which is ideologically based instead of scientifically based.
That's right.
And I think the fear is that the science is getting in the way
of the ideology. So we,
I agree with most of the goals of the people
who are ideologically motivated, we want to reduce human suffering.
We want to have, make sure that we have, uh,
equal human rights for people who have all kinds of differences.
And so I agree with all that,
but I don't think that if science tells us that some
of these differences are grounded in biology, that means that a,
these traits that maybe, uh, like extreme male aggression,
that doesn't mean that that's immutable. I mean,
we have tons of evidence that it's not immutable humans have control over their
behavior. It depends heavily on the culture.
So denying the importance of say testosterone in male aggression,
isn't going to change the way that sort of differences in our natures
or the impetus for males to feel, um,
more than females that they, uh,
want to be physically aggressive or to respond aggressively uncertain
situations. Um,
and I like that you said that you implied that there's lots of overlap in
behavior between males and females and the degree to which that is grounded in
biology. So the point isn't,
and I just want to make it really clear at the beginning.
It's not that females are like this and males are like that in human and humans
or in other species. And especially, you know,
culture plays such a huge role in how we develop and how we express ourselves.
But even apart from culture, there are differences on average.
So there are some females who are highly physically aggressive,
and there are many males who are really emotional and sensitive and totally
peaceful. Can I say that? You just said you'd tear up sometimes. Okay.
So you're for happy things.
Okay. So yeah, no, and I, I just cry when I'm moved or passionate. I cry a lot.
And I actually talk about that in the book because there's a relationship with
testosterone there that we can talk about later, which is really interesting.
But the point is that, you know,
my book tea is not about not trying to
explain why males are one way and females are another way,
but why we're different on average,
why we have somewhat different natures and testosterone is to me the most
powerful way to understand those differences in our natures, you know,
from an evolutionary point of view and looking at how we as animals as
mammals, um,
try to maximize our reproductive success, right?
And that's,
so that's what testosterone does is it helps males maximize basically the number
of offspring they have through increasing mating opportunities.
It doesn't mean that males are only interested in having tons of sex and tons of
sex partners,
but they're definitely more interested in that than females in humans.
And in many other species where increasing the number of mates, you know,
yields reproductive benefits for males, but not females.
And that's what sex hormones do.
And estrogen and progesterone do similar things in women,
but it doesn't motivate us to fight aggressively for mates.
Right? Clearly, if we were looking at this again, as an objective observer,
we would see all this that would be without there wouldn't be any debate.
It'd be like, this is fascinating. Well,
this is why they've only been around for a couple of hundred thousand years.
And for a long time, they were eaten by Jaguars.
And so they had to make as many babies as possible in order to ensure survival
of the species. All this makes sense,
catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free. Only on Spotify,
watch back catalog J R E videos on Spotify,
including clips easily seamlessly switch between video
and audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data costs. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan.